---
title: A lot of algebra prelims
---

2018
====

Show that no finite group is the union of conjugates of a proper
subgroup.

Classify all groups of order 18 up to isomorphism.

Let $\alpha,\beta$ denote the unique positive real $5^{\text{th}}$ root
of 7 and $4^{\text{th}}$ root of 5, respectively. Determine the degree
of $\mathbb Q(\alpha,\beta)$ over $\mathbb Q$.

Show that the field extension $\mathbb Q\subseteq\mathbb Q\left(
    \sqrt{2+\sqrt2}\right)$ is Galois and determine its Galois group.

Let $M$ be a square matrix over a field $K$. Use a suitable canonical
form to show that $M$ is similar to its transpose $M^T$.

Let $G$ be a finite group and $\pi$, $\pi'$ be two irreducible
representations of $G$. Prove or disprove the following assertion: $\pi$
and $\pi'$ are equivalent if and only if $\det\pi(g)=\det\pi'(g)$ for
all $g\in G$.

2017
====

Let $R$ be a Noetherian ring. Prove that $R[x]$ and $R[[x]]$ are both
Noetherian. (The first part of the question is asking you to prove the
Hilbert Basis Theorem, not to use it!)

Classify (with proof) all fields with finitely many elements.

Suppose $A$ is a commutative ring and $M$ is a finitely presented
module. Given any surjection $\phi:A^n\rightarrow M$ from a finite free
$A$-module, show that $\ker\phi$ is finitely generated.

Classify all groups of order 57.

Show that a finite simple group cannot have a 2-dimensional irreducible
representation over $\mathbb C$. (Hint: the determinant might prove
useful.)

2016
====

Let $G$ be a finite simple group. Assume that every proper subgroup of
$G$ is abelian. Prove that then $G$ is cyclic of prime order.

Let $a\in\mathbb N$, $a>0$. Compute the Galois group of the splitting
field of the polynomial $x^5-5a^4x+a$ over $\mathbb Q$.

Recall that an inner automorphism of a group is an automorphism given by
conjugation by an element of the group. An outer automorphism is an
automorphism that is not inner.

(a) Prove that $S_5$ has a subgroup of order 20.

(b) Use the subgroup from (a) to construct a degree 6 permutation
    representation of $S_5$ (i.e., an embedding
    $S_5 \hookrightarrow S_6$ as a transitive permutation group on 6
    letters).

(c) Conclude that $S_6$ has an outer automorphism.

Let $A$ be a commutative ring and $M$ a finitely generated $A$-module.
Define
$$\mathop{\mathrm{Ann}}(M) = \{a \in A: am = 0 \text{ for all } m \in M\}.$$
Show that for a prime ideal $\mathfrak p \subset A$, the following are
equivalent:

(a) $\mathop{\mathrm{Ann}}(M) \not\subset \mathfrak p$

(b) The localization of $M$ at the prime ideal $\mathfrak p$ is $0$.

(c) $M \otimes_A k(\mathfrak p) = 0$, where
    $k(\mathfrak p) = A_{\mathfrak p}/\mathfrak p A_{\mathfrak p}$ is
    the residue field of $A$ at $\mathfrak p$.

Let $A = \mathbb{C}[x,y]/(y^2-(x-1)^3 - (x-1)^2)$.

(a) Show that $A$ is an integral domain and sketch the
    $\mathbb{R}$-points of $\text{Spec} A$.

(b) Find the integral closure of $A$. Recall that for an integral domain
    $A$ with fraction field $K$, the integral closure of $A$ in $K$ is
    the set of all elements of $K$ integral over $A$.

Let $R = k[x,y]$ where $k$ is a field, and let $I=(x,y)R$.

1.  Show that $$\begin{tikzcd}
            0 \ar[r] & R \arrow[r,"\phi"] & R \oplus R \arrow[r,"\psi"] & R \arrow[r] & k \arrow[r] & 0
            \end{tikzcd}$$ where $\phi(a) = (-ya,xa)$,
    $\psi((a,b)) = xa+yb$ for $a,b \in R$, is a projective resolution of
    the $R$-module $k \simeq R/I$.

2.  Show that $I$ is not a flat $R$-module by computing
    $\mathop{\mathrm{Tor}}_i^R(I,k)$

2015
====

(a) Find an irreducible polynomial of degree 5 over the field
    $\mathbb Z/2$ of two elements and use it to construct a field of
    order 32 as a quotient of the polynomial ring $\mathbb Z/2[x]$.

(b) Using the polynomial found in part (a), find a $5\times5$ matrix $M$
    over $\mathbb Z/2$ of order 31, so that $M^{31}=I$ but $M\neq I$.

Find the minimal polynomial of $\sqrt2+\sqrt3$ over $\mathbb Q$. Justify
your answer.

(a) Let $R$ be a commutative ring with no nonzero nilpotent elements.
    Show that the only units in the polynomial ring $R[x]$ are the units
    of $R$, regarded as constant polynomials.

(b) Find all units in the polynomial ring $\mathbb Z_4[x]$.

Let $p$, $q$ be two distinct primes. Prove that there is at most one
non-abelian group of order $pq$ and describe the pairs $(p,q)$ such that
there is no non-abelian group of order $pq$.

(a) Let $L$ be a Galois extension of a field $K$ of degree 4. What is
    the minimum number of subfields there could be strictly between $K$
    and $L$? What is the maximum number of such subfields? Give examples
    where these bounds are attained.

(b) How do these numbers change if we assume only that $L$ is separable
    (but not necessarily Galois) over $K$?

Let $R$ be a commutative algebra over $\mathbb C$. A derivation of $R$
is a $\mathbb C$-linear map $D:R\rightarrow R$ such that (i) $D(1)=0$
and (ii) $D(ab)=D(a)b+aD(b)$ for all $a,b\in R$.

(a) Describe all derivations of the polynomial ring $\mathbb C[x]$.

(b) Let $A$ be the subring (or $\mathbb C$-subalgebra) of
    $\mathop{\mathrm{End}}_{\mathbb C}(\mathbb C[x])$ generated by all
    derivations of $\mathbb C[x]$ and the left multiplications by $x$.
    Prove that $\mathbb C[x]$ is a simple left $A$-module. Note that the
    inclusion
    $A\rightarrow\mathop{\mathrm{End}}_{\mathbb C}(\mathbb C[x])$
    defines a natural left $A$-module structure on $\mathbb C[x]$.

Let $G$ be a non-abelian group of order $p^3$ with $p$ a prime.

(a) Determine the order of the center $Z$ of $G$.

(b) Determine the number of inequivalent complex 1-dimensional
    representations of $G$.

(c) Compute the dimensions of all the inequivalent irreducible
    representations of $G$ and verify that the number of such
    representations equals the number of conjugacy classes of $G$.

2014
====

(a) Let $G$ be a group (not necessarily finite) that contains a subgroup
    of index $n$. Show that $G$ contains a *normal* subgroup $N$ such
    that $n\leq[G:N]\leq n!$

(b) Use part (a) to show that there is no simple group of order 36.

Let $p$ be a prime, let $\mathbb F_p$ be the $p$-element field, and let
$K=\mathbb F_p(t)$ be the field of rational functions in $t$ with
coefficients in $\mathbb F_p$. Consider the polynomial $f(x)=
    x^p-t\in K[x]$.

(a) Show that $f$ does not have a root in $K$.

(b) Let $E$ be the splitting field of $f$ over $K$. Find the
    factorization of $f$ over $E$.

(c) Conclude that $f$ is irreducible over $K$.

Recall that a ring $A$ is called *graded* if it admits a direct sum
decomposition $A=\oplus_{n=0}^{\infty}A_n$ as abelian groups, with the
property that $A_iA_j\subseteq A_{i+j}$ for all $i,j\geq 0$. Prove that
a graded commutative ring $A=\oplus_{n=0}^{\infty} A_n$ is Noetherian if
and only if $A_0$ is Noetherian and $A$ is finitely generated as an
algebra over $A_0$.

Let $R$ be a ring with the property that $a^2=a$ for all $a\in R$.

(a) Compute the Jacobson radical of $R$.

(b) What is the characteristic of $R$?

(c) Prove that $R$ is commutative.

(d) Prove that if $R$ is finite, then $R$ is isomorphic (as a ring) to
    $(\mathbb Z/2\mathbb Z)^d$ for some $d$.

Let $\overline{\mathbb F_p}$ denote the algebraic closure of
$\mathbb F_p$. Show that the Galois group
$\mathop{\mathrm{Gal}}(\overline{\mathbb F_p}/\mathbb F_p)$ has no
non-trivial finite subgroups.

Let $C_p$ denote the cyclic group of order $p$.

(a) Show that $C_p$ has two irreducible representations over $\mathbb Q$
    (up to isomorphism), one of dimension 1 and one of dimension $p-1$.

(b) Let $G$ be a finite group, and let $\rho:G\rightarrow
                \mathop{\mathrm{GL}}_n(\mathbb Q)$ be a representation
    of $G$ over $\mathbb Q$. Let
    $\rho_{\mathbb C}:G\rightarrow\mathop{\mathrm{GL}}_n(\mathbb C)$
    denote $\rho$ followed by the inclusion
    $\mathop{\mathrm{GL}}_n(\mathbb Q)\rightarrow
                \mathop{\mathrm{GL}}_n(\mathbb C)$. Thus
    $\rho_{\mathbb C}$ is a representation of $G$ over $\mathbb C$,
    called the *complexification* of $\rho$. We say that an irreducible
    representation $\rho$ of $G$ is *absolutely irreducible* if its
    complexification remains irreducible over $\mathbb C$.\
    Now suppose $G$ is abelian and that every representation of $G$ over
    $\mathbb Q$ is absolutely irreducible. Show that $G\cong(C_2)^k$ for
    some $k$ (i.e., is a product of cyclic groups of order 2).

Let $G$ be a finite group and $\mathbb Z[G]$ the internal group algebra.
Let $\mathcal Z$ be the center of $\mathbb Z[G]$. For each conjugacy
class $C\subseteq G$, let $P_C=\sum_{g\in C}g$.

(a) Show that the elements $P_C$ form a $\mathbb Z$-basis for
    $\mathcal Z$. Hence $\mathcal Z\cong\mathbb Z^d$ as an abelian
    group, where $d$ is the number of conjugacy classes in $G$.

(b) Show that if a ring $R$ is isomorphic to $\mathbb Z^d$ as an abelian
    group, then every element in $R$ satisfies a monic integral
    polynomial. (**Hint:** Let $\{v_1,\dots,v_d\}$ be a basis of $R$ and
    for a fixed non-zero $r\in R$, write $rv_i=\sum_j
                a_{ij}v_j$. Use the Hamilton-Cayley theorem.)

(c) Let $\pi:G\rightarrow\mathop{\mathrm{GL}}(V)$ be an irreducible
    representation of $G$ (over $\mathbb C$). Show that $\pi(P_C)$ acts
    on $V$ as multiplication by the scalar
    $$\frac{|C|\chi_{\pi}(C)}{\dim V},$$ where $\chi_{\pi}(C)$ is the
    value of the character $\chi_{\pi}$ on any element of $C$.

(d) Conclude that $|C|\chi_{\pi}(C)/\dim V$ is an algebraic integer.

2013
====

(a) Suppose that $G$ is a finitely generated group. Let $n$ be a
    positive integer. Prove that $G$ has only finitely many subgroups of
    index $n$

(b) Let $p$ be a prime number. If $G$ is any finitely-generated abelian
    group, let $t_p(G)$ denote the number of subgroups of $G$ of index
    $p$. Determine the possible values of $t_p(G)$ as $G$ varies over
    all finitely-generated abelian groups.

Suppose that $G$ is a finite group of order 2013. Prove that $G$ has a
normal subgroup $N$ of index 3 and that $N$ is a cyclic group.
Furthermore, prove that the center of $G$ has order divisible by 11.
(You will need the factorization $2013=3\cdot11\cdot61$.)

This question concerns an extension $K$ of $\mathbb Q$ such that
$[K:\mathbb Q]=8$. Assume that $K/\mathbb Q$ is Galois and let
$G=\mathop{\mathrm{Gal}}(K/\mathbb Q)$. Furthermore, assume that $G$ is
non-abelian.

(a) Prove that $K$ has a unique subfield $F$ such that $F/\mathbb Q$ is
    Galois and $[F:\mathbb Q]=4$.

(b) Prove that $F$ has the form $F=\mathbb Q(\sqrt{d_1},\sqrt{d_2})$
    where $d_1,d_2$ are non-zero integers.

(c) Suppose that $G$ is the quaternionic group. Prove that $d_1$ and
    $d_2$ are positive integers.

This question concerns the polynomial ring $R=\mathbb Z[x,y]$ and the
ideal $I=(5,x^2+2)$ in $R$.

(a) Prove that $I$ is a prime ideal of $R$ and that $R/I$ is a PID.

(b) Give an explicit example of a maximal ideal of $R$ which contains
    $I$. (Give a set of generators for such an ideal.)

(c) Show that there are infinitely many distinct maximal ideals in $R$
    which contain $I$.

2012
====

Classify all groups of order 2012 up to isomorphism. (Hint: 503 is
prime).

For any positive integer $n$, let $G_n$ be the group generated by $a$
and $b$ subject to the following three relations:
$$a^2=1, \quad b^2=1, \quad \text{and} \quad (ab)^n=1.$$

(a) Find the order of the group $G_n$

(We don't know how to do the rest of the problem)

Determine the Galois groups of the following polynomials over
$\mathbb Q$.

(a) $f(x)=x^4+4x^2+1$

(b) $f(x)=x^4+4x^2-5$.

Let $R$ be a (commutative) principal ideal domain, let $M$ and $N$ be
finitely generated free $R$-modules, and let $\varphi:M\rightarrow N$ be
an $R$-module homomorphism.

(a) Let $K$ be the kernel of $\varphi$. Prove that $K$ is a direct
    summand of $M$.

(b) Let $C$ be the image of $\varphi$. Show by example (specifying $R$,
    $M$, $N$, and $\varphi$) that $C$ need not be a direct summand of
    $N$.

2011
====

In this problem, as you apply Sylow's Theorem, state precisely which
portions you are using.

(a) Prove that there is no simple group of order 30.

(b) Suppose that $G$ is a simple group of order 60. Determine the number
    of $p$-Sylow subgroups of $G$ for each prime $p$ dividing 60, then
    prove that $G$ is isomorphic to the alternating group $A_5$.

Note: in the second part, you needn't show that $A_5$ is simple. You
need only show that if there is a simple group of order 60, then it must
be isomorphic to $A_5$.

Describe the Galois group and the intermediate fields of the cyclotomic
extension $\mathbb Q(\zeta_{12})/\mathbb Q$.

Let $$R=\mathbb Z[x]/(x^2+x+1).$$

(a) Answer the following questions with suitable justification.

    (i) Is $R$ a Noetherian ring?

    (ii) Is $R$ an Artinian ring?

(b) Prove that $R$ is an integrally closed domain.

Let $R$ be a commutative ring. Recall that an element $r$ of $R$ is
*nilpotent* if $r^n=0$ for some positive integer $n$ and that the
*nilradical* of $R$ is the set $N(R)$ of nilpotent elements.

(a) Prove that $$N(R)=\cap_{P\text{ prime}}P.$$ (Hint: given a
    non-nilpotent element $r$ of $R$, you may wish to construct a prime
    ideal that does not contain $r$ or its powers.)

(b) Given a positive integer $m$, determine the nilradical of
    $\mathbb Z/(m)$.

(c) Determine the nilradical of $\mathbb C[x,y]/(y^2-x^3)$.

(d) Let $p(x,y)$ be a polynomial in $\mathbb C[x,y]$ such that for any
    complex number $a$, $p(a,a^{3/2})=0$. Prove that $p(x,y)$ is
    divisible by $y^2-x^3$.

Given a finite group $G$, recall that its *regular representation* is
the representation on the complex group algebra $\mathbb C[G]$ induced
by left multiplication of $G$ on itself and its *adjoint representation*
is the representation on the complex group algebra $\mathbb C[G]$
induced by conjugation of $G$ on itself.

(a) Let $G=\mathop{\mathrm{GL}}_2(\mathbb F_2)$. Describe the number and
    dimensions of the irreducible representations of $G$. Then describe
    the decomposition of its regular representation as a direct sum of
    irreducible representations.

(b) Let $G$ be a group of order 12. Show that its adjoint representation
    is reducible; that is, there is an $H$-invariant subspace of
    $\mathbb C[H]$ besides 0 and $\mathbb C[H]$.

Let $R$ be a commutative integral domain. Show that the following are
equivalent:

(a) $R$ is a field;

(b) $R$ is a semi-simple ring;

(c) Any $R$-module is projective.

2010
====

Let $p$ be a positive prime number, $\mathbb F_p$ the field with $p$
elements, and let $G=\text{GL}_2(\mathbb F_p)$.

(a) Compute the order of $G$, $|G|$.

(b) Write down an explicit isomorphism from $\mathbb Z/p\mathbb Z$ to
    $$U=\left\{
                \begin{pmatrix}
                    1 & a\\
                    0 & 1
                \end{pmatrix}
                \bigg|a\in\mathbb F_p\right\}.$$

(c) How many subgroups of order $p$ does $G$ have? Hint: compute
    $gug^{-1}$ for $g\in G$ and $u\in U$; use this to find the size of
    the normalizer of $U$ in $G$.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
(a) Give definitions of the following terms: (i) a finite length (left)
    module, (ii) a composition series for a module, and (iii) the length
    of a module,

(b) Let $l(M)$ denote the length of a module $M$. Prove that if
    $$0\rightarrow M_1\rightarrow M_2\rightarrow\dots\rightarrow
                M_n\rightarrow 0$$ is an exact sequence of modules of
    finite length, then $$\sum_{i=1}^n(-1)^kl(M_i)=0.$$

Let $\mathbb F$ be a field of characteristic $p$, and $G$ a group of
order $p^n$. Let $R=\mathbb F[G]$ be the group ring (group algebra) of
$G$ over $\mathbb F$, and let $u:=\sum_{x\in G}x$ (so $u$ is an element
of $R$).

(a) Prove that $u$ lies in the center of $R$.

(b) Verify that $Ru$ is a 2-sided ideal of $R$.

(c) Show there exists a positive integer $k$ such that $u^k=0$. Conclude
    that for such a $k$, $(Ru)^k=0$.

(d) Show that $R$ is **not** a semi-simple ring. (**Warning:** Please
    use the definition of a semi-simple ring: do **not** use the result
    that a finite length ring fails to be semisimple if and only if it
    has a non-zero nilpotent ideal.)

Let $f(x)=a_nx^n+a_{n-1}x^{n-1}+\dots+a_0\in\mathbb Z[x]$ (where
$a_n\neq 0$) and let $R=\mathbb Z[x]/(f)$. Prove that $R$ is a finitely
generated module over $\mathbb Z$ if and only if $a_n=\pm 1$.

Consider the ring
$$S=C[0,1]=\{f:[0,1]\rightarrow\mathbb R:f\text{ is continuous}\}$$ with
the usual operations of addition and multiplication of functions.

(a) What are the invertible elements of $S$?

(b) For $a\in[0,1]$, define $I_a=\{f\in S:f(a)=0\}$. Show that $I_a$ is
    a maximal ideal of $S$.

(c) Show that the elements of any proper ideal of $S$ have a common
    zero, i.e., if $I$ is a proper ideal of $S$, then there exists
    $a\in[0,1]$ such that $f(a)=0$ for all $f\in I$. Conclude that every
    maximal ideal of $S$ is of the form $I_a$ for some $a\in[0,1]$.
    **Hint:** as $[0,1]$ is compact, every open cover of $[0,1]$
    contains a finite subcover.

Let $F$ be a field of characteristic zero, and let $K$ be an *algebraic*
extension of $F$ that possesses the following property: every polynomial
$f\in F[x]$ has a root in $K$. Show that $K$ is algebraically closed.\
**Hint:** if $K(\theta)/K$ is algebraic, consider $F(\theta)/F$ and its
normal closure; primitive elements might be of help.

Let $G$ be the unique non-abelian group of order 21.

(a) Describe all 1-dimensional complex representations of $G$.

(b) How many (non-isomorphic) irreducible complex representations does
    $G$ have and what are their dimensions?

(c) Determine the character table of $G$.

2009
====

(a) Classify all groups of order $2009=7^2\times 41$.

(b) Suppose that $G$ is a group of order 2009. How many intermediate
    groups are there---that is, how many groups H are there with
    $1\subsetneq H\subsetneq G$, where both inclusions are proper?
    (There may be several cases to consider.)

Let $K$ be a field. A discrete valuation on $K$ is a function $\nu:
    K\setminus\{0\}\rightarrow\mathbb Z$ such that

(i) $\nu(ab)=\nu(a)+\nu(b)$

(ii) $\nu$ is surjective

(iii) $\nu(a+b)\geq\text{min}\{(\nu(a),\nu(b)\}$ for
      $a,b\in K\setminus\{0\}$ with $a+b\neq 0$.

Let $R:=\{x\in K\setminus\{0\}:\nu(x)\geq0\}\cup\{0\}$. Then $R$ is
called the valuation ring of $\nu$. Prove the following:

(a) $R$ is a subring of $K$ containing the 1 in $K$.

(b) for all $x\in K\setminus\{0\}$, either $x$ or $x^{-1}$ is in $R$.

(c) $x$ is a unit of $R$ if and only if $\nu(x)=0$.

(d) Let $p$ be a prime number, $K=\mathbb Q$, and
    $\nu_p:\mathbb Q\setminus\{0\}\rightarrow\mathbb Z$ be the function
    defined by $\nu_p(\frac ab)=n$ where $\frac ab=p^n\frac cd$ and $p$
    does not divide $c$ and $d$. Prove that the corresponding valuation
    ring $R$ is the ring of all rational numbers whose denominators are
    relatively prime to $p$.

Let $F$ be a field of characteristic not equal to 2.

(a) Prove that any extension $K$ of $F$ of degree 2 is of the form
    $F(\sqrt D)$ where $D\in F$ is not a square in $F$ and, conversely,
    that each such extension has degree 2 over $F$.

(b) Let $D_1,D_2\in F$ neither of which is a square in $F$. Prove that
    $[F(\sqrt{D_1},\sqrt{D_2}):F]=4$ if $D_1D_2$ is not a square in $F$
    and is of degree 2 otherwise.

Let $F$ be a field and $p(x)\in F[x]$ an irreducible polynomial.

(a) Prove that there exists a field extension $K$ of $F$ in which $p(x)$
    has a root.

(b) Determine the dimension of $K$ as a vector space over $F$ and
    exhibit a vector space basis for $K$.

(c) If $\theta\in K$ denotes a root of $p(x)$, express $\theta^{-1}$ in
    terms of the basis found in part (b).

(d) Suppose $p(x)=x^3+9x+6$. Show $p(x)$ is irreducible over
    $\mathbb Q$. If $\theta$ is a root of $p(x)$, compute the inverse of
    $(1+\theta)$ in $\mathbb Q(\theta)$.

Fix a ring $R$, an $R$-module $M$, and an $R$-module homomorphism
$f:M\rightarrow M$.

(a) If $M$ satisfies the descending chain condition on submodules, show
    that if $f$ is injective, then $f$ is surjective. (Hint: note that
    if $f$ is injective, so are $f\circ f$, $f\circ f\circ f$, etc.)

(b) Give an example of a ring $R$, an $R$-module $M$, and an injective
    $R$-module homomorphism $f:M\rightarrow M$ which is not surjective.

(c) If $M$ satisfies the ascending chain condition on submodules, show
    that if $f$ is surjective, then $f$ is injective.

(d) Give an exampe of a ring $R$, and $R$-module $M$, and a surjective
    $R$-module homomorphism $f:M\rightarrow M$ which is not injective.

Let $G$ be a finite group, $k$ an algebraically closed field, and $V$ an
irreducible $k$-linear representation of $G$.

(a) Show that $\mathop{\mathrm{Hom}}_{kG}(V,V)$ is a division algebra
    with $k$ in its center.

(b) Show that $V$ is finite-dimensional over $k$, and conclude that
    $\mathop{\mathrm{Hom}}_{kG}(V,V)$ is also finite dimensional.

(c) Show the inclusion $k\hookrightarrow\mathop{\mathrm{Hom}}_{kG}(V,V)$
    found in (a) is an isomorphism. (For
    $f\in\mathop{\mathrm{Hom}}_{kG}(V,V)$, view $f$ as a linear
    transformation and consider $f-\alpha I$, where $\alpha$ is an
    eigenvalue of $f$).

2008
====

Let $f(x)$ be an irreducible polynomial of degree 5 over the field
$\mathbb Q$ of rational numbers with exactly 3 real roots.

(a) Show that $f(x)$ is not solvable by radicals.

(b) Let $E$ be the splitting field of $f$ over $\mathbb Q$. Construct a
    Galois extension $K$ of degree 2 over $\mathbb Q$ lying in $E$ such
    that *no* field $F$ strictly between $K$ and $E$ is Galois over
    $\mathbb Q$.

Let $F$ be a finite field. Show for any positive integer $n$ that there
are irreducible polynomials of degree $n$ in $F[x]$.

Show that the order of the group $\text{GL}_n(\mathbb F_q)$ of
invertible $n\times n$ matrices over the field $\mathbb F_q$ of $q$
elements is given by $(q^n-1)(q^n-q)\dots(q^n-q^{n-1})$.

(a) Let $R$ be a commutative principal ideal domain. Show that any
    $R$-module $M$ generated by two elements takes the form
    $R/(a)\oplus R/(b)$ for some $a,b\in R$. What more can you say about
    $a$ and $b$?

(b) Give a necessary and sufficient condition for two direct sums as in
    part (a) to be isomorphic as $R$-modules.

Let $G$ be the subgroup of $\text{GL}_3(\mathbb C)$ generated by the
three matrices $$A=
    \begin{pmatrix}
        0 & 0 & 1\\
        0 & 1 & 0\\
        1 & 0 & 0
    \end{pmatrix},
    \quad B=
    \begin{pmatrix}
        0 & 0 & 1\\
        1 & 0 & 0\\
        0 & 1 & 0
    \end{pmatrix},
    \quad C=
    \begin{pmatrix}
        i & 0 & 0\\
        0 & 1 & 0\\
        0 & 0 & 1
    \end{pmatrix}$$ where $i^2=-1$. Here $\mathbb C$ denotes the complex
field.

(a) Compute the order of $G$.

(b) Find a matrix in $G$ of largest possible order (as an element of
    $G$) and compute this order.

(c) Compute the number of elements in $G$ with this largest order.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
(a) Let $G$ be a group of (finite) order $n$. Show that any irreducible
    left module over the group algebra $\mathbb CG$ has complex
    dimension at least $\sqrt n$.

(b) Give an example of a group $G$ of order $n\geq5$ and an irreducible
    left module over $\mathbb CG$ of complex dimension
    $\lfloor\sqrt n\rfloor$, the greatest integer to $\sqrt n$.

Use the rational canonical form to show that any square matrix $M$ over
a field $k$ is similar to its transpose $M^t$, recalling that $p(M)=0$
for some $p\in k[t]$ if and only if $p(M^t)=0$.

2007
====

Let $K$ be a field of characteristic zero and $L$ a Galois extension of
$K$. Let $f$ be an irreducible polynomial in $K[x]$ of degree 7 and
suppose $f$ has no zeroes in $L$. Show that $f$ is irreducible in
$L[x]$.

Let $K$ be a field of characteristic zero and $f\in K[x]$ an irreducible
polynomial of degree $n$. Let $L$ be a splitting field for $f$. Let $G$
be the group of automorphisms of $L$ which act trivially on $K$.

(a) Show that $G$ embeds in the symmetric group $S_n$.

(b) For each $n$, give an example of a field $K$ and polynomial $f$ such
    that $G=S_n$.

(c) What are the possible groups $G$ when $n=3$. Justify your answer.

Show there are exactly two groups of order 21 up to isomorphism.

2006
====

Let $K$ be the field $\mathbb Q(z)$ of rational functions in a variable
$z$ with coeffiecients in the rational field $\mathbb Q$. Let $n$ be a
positive integer. Consider the polynomial $x^n-z\in K[x]$.

(a) Show that the polynomial $x^n-z$ is irreducible over $K$.

(b) Describe the splitting field of $x^n-z$ over $K$.

(c) Determine the Galois group of the splitting field of $x^5-z$ over
    the field $K$.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
(a) Let $p<q<r$ be prime integers. Show that a group of order $pqr$
    cannot be simple.

(b) Consider groups of orders $2^2\cdot 3\cdot p$ where $p$ has the
    values 5, 7, and 11. For each of those values of $p$, either display
    a simple group of order $2^2\cdot 3\cdot p$, or show that there
    cannot be a simple group of that order.

Let $K/F$ be a finite Galois extension and let $n=[K:F]$. There is a
theorem (often referred to as the \"normal basis theorem\") which states
that there exists an irreducible polynomial $f(x)\in F[x]$ whose roots
form a basis for $K$ as a vector space over $F$. You may assume that
theorem in this problem.

(a) Let $G=\mathop{\mathrm{Gal}}(K/F)$. The action of $G$ on $K$ makes
    $K$ into a finite-dimensional representation space for $G$ over $F$.
    Prove that $K$ is isomorphic to the regular representation for $G$
    over $F$.\
    (The regular representation is defined by letting $G$ act on the
    group algebra $F[G]$ by multiplication on the left.)

(b) Suppose that the Galois group $G$ is cyclic and that $F$ contains a
    primitive $n^{\text{th}}$ root of unity. Show that there exists an
    injective homomorphism $\chi:G\rightarrow
                F^{\times}$.

(c) Show that $K$ contains a non-zero element $a$ with the following
    property: $$g(a)=\chi(g)\cdot a$$ for all $g\in G$.

(d) If $a$ has the property stated in (c), show that $K=F(a)$ and that
    $a^n\in F^{\times}$.

Let $G$ be the group of matrices of the form $$\begin{pmatrix}
        1 & a & b\\
        0 & 1 & c\\
        0 & 0 & 1
    \end{pmatrix}$$ with entries in the finite field $\mathbb F_p$ of
$p$ element, where $p$ is a prime.

(a) Prove that $G$ is non-abelian.

(b) Suppose $p$ is odd. Prove that $g^p=I_3$ for all $g\in G$.

(c) Suppose that $p=2$. It is known that there are exactly two
    non-abelian groups of order 8, up to isomorphism: the dihedral group
    $D_8$ and the quaternionic group. Assuming this fact without proof,
    determine which of these groups $G$ is isomorphic to.

There are five nonisomorphic groups of order 8. For each of those groups
$G$, find the smallest positive integer n such that there is an
injective homomorphism $\varphi: G\rightarrow S_n$.

2005
====

For any group $G$ we define $\Omega(G)$ to be the image of the group
homomorphism $\rho:G\rightarrow\mathop{\mathrm{Aut}}(G)$ where $\rho$
maps $g\in G$ to the conjugation automorphism $x\mapsto gxg^{-1}$.
Starting with a group $G_0$, we define $G_1=\Omega(G_0)$ and
$G_{i+1}=\Omega(G_i)$ for all $i\geq 0$. If $G_0$ is of order $p^e$ for
a prime $p$ and integer $e\geq 2$, prove that $G_{e-1}$ is the trivial
group.

Let $\mathbb F_2$ be the field with two elements.

(a) What is the order of $\text{GL}_3(\mathbb F_2)$?

(b) Use the fact that $\text{GL}_3(\mathbb F_2)$ is a simple group
    (which you should not prove) to find the number of elements of order
    7 in $\text{GL}_3(\mathbb F_2)$.

Let $G$ be a finite abelian group. Let $f:\mathbb Z^m\rightarrow G$ be a
surjection of abelian groups. We may think of $f$ as a homomorphism of
$\mathbb Z$-modules. Let $K$ be the kernel of $f$.

(a) Prove that $K$ is isomorphic to $\mathbb Z^m$.

(b) We can therefore write the inclusion map $K\rightarrow\mathbb Z^m$
    as $\mathbb Z^m\rightarrow\mathbb Z^m$ and represent it by an
    $m\times m$ integer matrix $A$. Prove that $|\det A|=|G|$.

Let $R=C([0,1])$ be the ring of all continuous real-valued functions on
the closed interval $[0,1]$, and for each $c\in[0,1]$, denote by $M_c$
the set of all functions $f\in R$ such that $f(c)=0$.

(a) Prove that $g\in R$ is a unit if and only if $g(c)\neq0$ for all
    $c\in[0,1]$.

(b) Prove that for each $c\in[0,1]$, $M_c$ is a maximal ideal of $R$.

(c) Prove that if $M$ is a maximal ideal of $T$, then $M=M_c$ for some
    $c\in[0,1]$. (Hint: compactness of $[0,1]$ may be relevant.)

Let $R$ and $S$ be commutative rings, and $f:R\rightarrow S$ a ring
homomorphism.

(a) Show that if $I$ is a prime ideal of $S$, then
    $$f^{-1}(I)=\{r\in R:f(r)\in I\}$$ is a prime ideal of $R$.

(b) Let $N$ be the set of nilpotent elements of $R$:
    $$N=\{r\in R:r^m=0\text{ for some }m\geq 1\}.$$ $N$ is called the
    *nilradical* of $R$. Prove that it is an ideal which is contained in
    every prime ideal.

(c) Part (a) lets us define a function
    $$f^*:\{\text{prime ideals of }S\}\rightarrow
                \{\text{prime ideals of }R\}.$$ $$I\mapsto f^{-1}(I).$$
    Let $N$ be the nilradical of $R$. Show that if $S=R/N$ and
    $f:R\rightarrow R/N$ is the quotient map, then $f^*$ is a bijection

Consider the polynomial $f(x)=x^{10}+x^5+1\in\mathbb Q[x]$ with
splitting field $K$ over $\mathbb Q$.

(a) Determine whether $f(x)$ is irreducible over $\mathbb Q$ and find
    $[K:\mathbb Q]$.

(b) Determine the structure of the Galois group
    $\mathop{\mathrm{Gal}}(K/\mathbb Q)$.

For each prime number $p$ and each positive integer $n$, how many
elements $\alpha$ are there in $\mathbb F_{p^n}$ such that
$F_p(\alpha)=F_{p^6}$?
